[DOC-1214][yba][2025.2.2]K8s Operator import universe (#30528)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/stable/yugabyte-platform/anywhere-automation/yb-kubernetes-operator.md

  - GFlags
```

## Operator import universe

{{<tags/feature/ea idea="12874">}} Starting in YBA versions v2025.2.2 and later, the Operator import universe feature enables you to import an existing YugabyteDB Anywhere universe that is running on Kubernetes managed via Helm charts to be managed by the YugabyteDB Kubernetes Operator.

### Before you begin

- Enable the Operator. The YBA Operator must be enabled on the YBA instance.

> - Verify namespace configuration. If the operator is configured to watch a single namespace, the namespace provided in the import payload must match that runtime configuration (for example, `yb.kubernetes.operator.namespace`).

Reviewer: maybe lets add something like:
"if the operator is not watching a specific namespace, the payload should be the namespace you want the resources to be created in"

### Before you begin

- Install the Operator. The YBA Operator must be enabled on the YBA instance. See [Installation - Install operator on existing YBA](#installation) for steps to enable the operator on an existing YBA.
- Verify namespace configuration.
  - If the operator is configured to watch a single, specific namespace, the namespace provided in the import payload must match that runtime configuration (for example, `yb.kubernetes.operator.namespace`).
  - If the operator is not watching a specific namespace, the payload should be the namespace you want the resources to be created in.
- Update universe CRDs. You must update the CRDs for your Kubernetes universe to the latest for the version of YugabyteDB Anywhere you have installed. Failure to do so may result in scaling down of pod resources during future edit operations.

{{< warning title="Import cannot be reversed" >}}
After a universe and its related resources are imported to be managed by the operator most edit operations are allowed only via the operator. The API and UI block edit actions on the imported resource. This operation _cannot_ be reversed.
{{< /warning >}}

### Import

> You perform Operator import using the YugabyteDB Anywhere API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To perform an operator import, you use the YugabyteDB Anywhere API.
```

| `<namespace>` | The Kubernetes namespace where the custom resources will be created.<br>This must be a namespace the operator is watching; when set, this corresponds to the runtime configuration `yb.kubernetes.operator.namespace`. |

#### Precheck

Run the precheck to ensure the universe is eligible for import. Returns HTTP 200 on success.

An example API request is as follows:

```sh
curl --request POST \
  --url https://<platform-url>/api/v2/customers/<customer-uuid>/universes/<universe-uuid>/operator-import/precheck \
  --header 'Accept: application/json' \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --header 'X-AUTH-YW-API-TOKEN: <api-token>' \
  -d '{"namespace": "<namespace>"}'
```

#### Import

Creates operator resources for the universe in the given namespace. Returns a task UUID and resource UUID.

An example API request is as follows:

```sh
curl --request POST \
  --url https://<platform-url>/api/v2/customers/<customer-uuid>/universes/<universe-uuid>/operator-import \
  --header 'Accept: application/json' \
  --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  --header 'X-AUTH-YW-API-TOKEN: <api-token>' \
  -d '{"namespace": "<namespace>"}'
```

### Resources imported

> Importing a universe to the Operator creates or adopts the following in the target namespace:

Reviewer 2: So let's go with 'operator' when used generically and 'Kubernetes Operator' when referring to the product
